---
title: Interacting with the Extempore Compiler
categories: extempore-overview
---

*Note: if you’re unfamiliar with some of the concepts presented here,
you might find the [docs index](../extempore-docs/index.org) helpful.*

The best way to think about programming and evaluating code in Extempore
is to think of it as a *compiler-as-a-service* (CaaS). The compiler
(provided by the `extempore` executable) runs in a shell console, and
you connect to it via a TCP socket connection. When the compiler
receives any code over this connection it compiles and executes it. The
general term for this is ‘evaluating’ the code. There are some nuances
to this process, but in general the programmer interacts with a running
Extempore process over a TCP connection.

The ‘chunks’ of code (serialised as strings) which are sent to the
xtlang compiler may be anything from small one-liners to whole source
files (via the `load` function). The functions and data (often referred
to collectively as the *environment*) persist for as long as the
`extempore` process is running. As discussed in [this
post](2012-08-07-extempore-philosophy.org), the Extempore compiler
actually compiles *two* languages: Scheme and xtlang (Extempore’s own
programming language).[^1] But the process of evaluating them is the
same—just sending strings to the compiler over the TCP port.

So, to do anything in Extempore you need a text editor which can

1.  open up a TCP connection to the compiler
2.  create a string which represents a valid chunk of Scheme or xtlang
    code
3.  send that string over the TCP connection[^2]

There are lots of text editors which can perform these functions, so you
basically have two options:

-   **If you already have a favourite text editor**, then you’ll
    probably want to write and evaluate your code using that editor.
    There are already Extempore modes/plugins for
    [Emacs](https://github.com/digego/extempore/blob/master/extras/extempore.el),
    [vim](https://github.com/digego/extempore/blob/master/extras/extempore.vim)
    and [Sublime Text 2](https://github.com/benswift/extempore-sublime)
    (see the `extras` subdirectory). If your favourite editor isn’t one
    of those three, then you might even have the chops to hack together
    a plugin yourself—at its most basic all it has to do is perform
    those three functions listed above (you can even use `telnet` or
    `netcat`).

-   **If you don’t have a favourite text editor** then pick one of the
    ones listed above ([Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/),
    [vim](http://www.vim.org) or [Sublime Text
    2](http://www.sublimetext.com)). The Emacs Extempore mode is the
    most mature and featureful. However, if you don’t want to deal with
    the (admittedly daunting) task of learning Emacs *as well as*
    Extempore, then the ST2 plugin is pretty good as well (although ST2
    does cost money).

There are some “cheat sheets” for using Extempore in
[Emacs](2012-10-10-extempore-emacs-cheat-sheet.org),
[vim](2014-11-07-hacking-extempore-in-vim.org) and
[ST2](2012-10-23-extempore-st2-cheat-sheet.org). In the end it doesn’t
matter too much which editor you use, so pick the one that makes you
happiest :)

# Running Extempore

I’m assuming that you’ve already downloaded and built the Extempore
binary executable. It will be called `extempore` on OSX or Linux
([installation
instructions](2013-03-20-building-extempore-on-osx-linux.org)) and
`extempore.exe` on Windows ([installation
instructions](2013-03-20-building-extempore-on-windows.org)).

When you start Extempore, you need to specify an audio device. This is
necessary even if you’re not planning to do any audio processing or
output, because Extempore’s internal clock is driven by the audio
device’s clock.[^3]

But how do we know what audio device to select? Well, the `extempore`
executable provides a handy command-line argument called
`--print-devices`. At a shell prompt, `cd` into the extempore source
directory (where the executable will be) and run

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/extempore-print-devices.png"
         alt="">
  </div>

As you can see, running `extempore` with the `--print-devices` argument
prints a list of all the audio devices (input, output and duplex) that
PortAudio can find on the system. On my laptop (as you can see above)
there are five devices. Three devices (device index `0` to `2`) are for
the built-in soundcard, and two more (device index `3` and `4`) are for
[Soundflower](http://code.google.com/p/soundflower/), which is a utility
for routing audio between different applications. Your computer will
probably print different devices—that’s ok.

For now, I want to use the default laptop output, which is `audio
device[2]`. When I run `extempore`, then, I want to pass this device
index with the `--device` argument. The `--device` argument is optional,
if it’s not supplied then Extempore will default to using whatever
device is found at index `0`. But it’s probably a good idea to specify
it explicitly, just to avoid any surprises.

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/extempore-start.png" alt="">
  </div>

After running `extempore` with `--device 2`, it prints some information
to `stdout` (which I’ll often refer to as the *log*) about the device
that it’s using. As you can see, it all looks ok: 2 channels out,
samplerate of 44100Hz. At this point, the `extempore` process is
running, and will keep doing so until you kill it.

Also, the compiler prints some information about ‘starting up some
processes’, namely a `primary` process on port `7099` and a `utility`
process on port `7098`. These are the TCP ports we’ll send our code to.
A running Extempore binary can provide *multiple* Extempore
processes[^4], as well as connecting to multiple other Extempore
processes, potentially running on remote hosts. This forms the basis for
Extempore’s powerful distributed processing capability, which I’ll cover
in a future blog post. For the moment, though, you don’t have to worry
about multiple processes, we’ll only connect and interact with the
`primary` process.

# Connecting to the Extempore compiler

So far, all the stuff we’ve done has been in a shell console. The
`extempore` process, which provides the Extempore compiler, is just
sitting there idle, waiting to be given some code to evaluate. That’s
where the text editor part of the equation comes in.

In this post I’m going to be fairly editor-agnostic, because (as I
mentioned before) as long your editor can open up the TCP connection to
the compiler and send code strings over it, then you’re good to go. In
places where there are editor-specific instructions, I’ll give
instructions for Emacs and ST2.

When you open up a file ending in `.xtm` (Extempore’s default file
extension), your editor should detect that you’re editing Extempore
source code, and load the appropriate Extempore plugin. Here’s a (short)
example file containing some Extempore code:

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/text-editor-start.png" alt="">
  </div>

The content of the file is at the top, and I’ve also included a
representation of the ‘echo area’ at the bottom (the *minibuffer* in
Emacs terminology). This is a part of your editor which displays
information about the results of different editor commands, and may also
be where the feedback from the Extempore compiler is ‘echoed’ (printed
out). It’s blank at the moment.

Now that we have

-   an editor open with some Extempore code
-   an Extempore (editor) plugin loaded
-   the `extempore` process still running

we can open up the TCP connection. In Emacs, this is done with `M-x
extempore-connect`. In ST2, use the menu item `Tools > Extempore >
Connect...`. The default host and port arguments will be `localhost` and
`7099` respectively. If the connection is made successfully, then
`extempore` will echo back the string “Welcome to extempore!”.

# Evaluating code

Once everything’s hooked up, then the compiler is just waiting there for
you to give it some code to evaluate. So, from a ‘blank slate’ `.xtm`
file, let’s start with some basic Scheme arithmetic. If you’re playing
along, you can write `(+ 1 2)` into your file somewhere.

This is where the ‘Compiler as a Service’ (CaaS) thing starts to get
real. Currently, the code `(+ 1 2)` is just text sitting in your editor.
It won’t get compiled until you send it for evaluation. If you’re using
Emacs, then the easiest way to do this is to move your cursor somewhere
inside the code `(+ 1 2)` and hit `C-M-x` (which is bound to
`extempore-send-definition`). In ST2, you can highlight the code you
want to evaluate and call the `Extempore: evaluate` command, either from
the command palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` on Windows/Linux or `Cmd+Shift+P` on
OSX) or through the default `Ctrl+e` keybinding. This takes the whole
expression `(+ 1 2)` and sends it (as a string) to the running
`extempore` compiler.

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/scheme-eval.png" alt="">
  </div>

The orange ‘box’ in the diagram indicates code that has been sent for
evaluation. See how the code string (in grey) is sent over the
connection, and the result is sent back (also as a string) and displayed
in the echo area. Nothing is printed in the console where `extempore` is
running. Congratulations—you’ve just evaluated your first Extempore
code!

We can write some more code to `bind-val` a global variable `myPI`,
which is an xtlang global variable of
[type](2012-08-09-xtlang-type-reference.org) `double`. If you evaluate
this with `C-M-x` (or whatever the command is in your editor) then what
happens is

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-1.png" alt="">
  </div>

One difference from the previous (Scheme) example is that the
`extempore` compiler now prints a message to the console: `Bound myPI
>>> double`. Evaluating *xtlang* code will always print a message to the
log about the name and type of the variables.[^5] Also, notice how the
string that is echoed back is “\#t”, which is the Scheme/xtlang literal
for boolean `true`. This is what the compiler returns if the value is
’`bind-val`’ed successfully. It’s worth observing that what the
`extempore` compiler prints to the log isn’t the same as the result it
echoes back to the editor over the TCP connection.

How about compiling an xtlang closure?

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-2.png" alt="">
  </div>

`circle_area` is an xtlang closure which takes a (`double`) argument
representing the radius of a circle and returns the area of that circle
(another `double`). It also uses the global variable `myPI` which we
evaluated earlier. The closure compiled successfully, and the compiler
prints `Compiled circle_area >>> [double,double]*` to the log. If there
was a problem with the compilation, then the compiler would have printed
a (hopefully helpful) compile error to the log instead.

Let’s find out the area of a circle of radius `5.0` units. We need to
call `circle_area` with the argument `5.0`.

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-3.png" alt="">
  </div>

When we evaluate the `(circle_area 5.0)` expression, a couple of things
happen. The code is sent to the compiler, which returns the value
`78.539816` to the editor. In addition, a message about ‘creating a new
[memory zone](2012-08-17-memory-management-in-extempore.org)’ is printed
to the log. That’s because this is the first time we’ve *called* some
xtlang code, and so a memory zone needs to be set up to provide any
`zalloc` memory. This zone allocation won’t happen if we evaluate the
same code again, because the default zone already exists. The compiler
in this ‘created default zone’ message is just telling us helpful things
about the state of our Extempore world.

As another example of the difference between the *return value* of an
xtlang expression and any *side effects* it may introduce, have a think
about how you would get the circle’s area printed to the log view,
rather than returned and shown in the echo area.

The answer: we can wrap the call to the `circle_area` closure in a call
to `println`. `println` is a built-in function which prints (to the log)
a string representation of whatever arguments it is passed.

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-4.png" alt="">
  </div>

This time, the result (`78.539816`) is printed to the log. And the
result returned to the editor is different, too—it’s now `#t`. That’s
because the `println` function returns a value, indicating whether it
was successful in printing its arguments to the log or not. The actual
*printing* is a ‘side effect’ of the `println` function—behaviour that
happens during the course of the function’s execution.

As a final basic example, we can send code to the compiler more than
‘one closure at a time’. Let’s write another closure, this time for
figuring out the area of a ‘doughnut’

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/doughnut-area.png" width="250px" alt="">
  </div>

Because we already have a closure (`circle_area`) for figuring out the
area of a circle, it makes sense to use that closure in our
`doughnut_area` closure. The area of the doughnut is the area of the
outer circle (radius `r1`) minus the area of the inner circle (radius
`r2`).

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-5.png" alt="">
  </div>

See how this time both the definition of the `doughnut_area` closure and
the call `(doughnut_area 5.0 2.5)` are sent to the compiler in the same
‘chunk’, meaning that they were both highlighted in the editor before
giving the evaluation command. The results of this evaluation indicate
that the two parts of the code were both evaluated successfully: the
`doughnut_area` closure compiled successfully, and the result
`58.904862` was returned to the editor.

# The power (and danger) of CaaS

Thus far in this post we’ve only evaluated code in the order it appears
in the file. Closures which use other closures or globals have all
worked fine. But when we kill the `extempore` process (i.e. with
`SIGINT`), the Extempore environment we’ve ‘built up’ isn’t saved—it’s
destroyed.

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/extempore-restart.png" width="300px" alt="">
  </div>

After restarting the `extempore` process above, and reconnecting the
editor to it, let’s try compiling the `doughnut_area` closure first:

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-compile-error.png" alt="">
  </div>

The `circle_area` closure isn’t there anymore, and so the compiler
throws an error (and no value is returned to the editor). Because the
compiler is a ‘service’, it’ll just evaluate the code and build up the
environment in whatever order you throw code at it. The source code
isn’t necessarily a linear representation of the evolution of the
environment—it all depends on the ‘evaluation trajectory’ that you take
through the code.

So, if we go back and evaluate all the necessary code, everything works
properly

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-6.png" alt="">
  </div>

One other thing you can do is *redefine* the behaviour of existing
functions and variables. For example, say we wanted to change our
`circle_area` function to use an ancient Egyptian approximation for the
area of a circle described on the [Rhind
papyrus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhind_papyrus) (c. 1800BC).

In the editor, *change the code* for the `circle_area` closure and
re-evaluate:

  <div class="ui image segment">
    <img src="/img/interacting-with-compiler/xtlang-eval-7.png" alt="">
  </div>

The result is (slightly) different, but not too far off—not bad for a
4000 year old formula. But the main thing is that the code to *call*
`circle_area` didn’t change—only the definition did. The new closure
definition has to have the same signature as the old one, so that any
code which calls the existing closure will still work ok (type-signature
wise). This re-configurability in the behaviour of the code lies at the
heart of [live coding](http://toplap.org), a practice which has informed
much of the design of Extempore.

This should be a serious challenge to any notion you may have had about
the source code being the canonical definition of how an Extempore
‘program’ behaves. In live programming, the programmer is constantly
both building *new* code and data structures, and also redefining and
re-evaluating *old* bits of code to fit better with the current
execution and environmental context. There are lots of deep implications
of this way of thinking about programming, and I won’t go into them
here, but hopefully this has been helpful for thinking about what
programming in Extempore looks like.

Now, if you want to code everything up in source files which are
evaluated linearly from start to finish (e.g. with a call to `load`)
then you can still do that, too. All of the Extempore libraries
(including those for DSP and graphics) work that way, and Extempore
still works great in that paradigm. But you have the ability to dive in
and change things if you need to, and that opens up some interesting
possibilities.

This post is really just the tip of the compiler-as-a-service (CaaS)
iceberg. Extempore’s CaaS will also let you do things like query for all
bound symbols, print all closures of a particular signature type, return
the [abstract syntax
tree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree) of a particular
closure, etc… In fact the Extempore compiler itself is fully runtime
modifiable!

# Next steps

There are lots of places to go now, you can keep reading through the
[docs](../extempore-docs/index.org), or start poking around the
`examples/` subdirectory in the Extempore source folder (which will be
in `/usr/local/Cellar/extempore/<version>/` if you installed Extempore
through homebrew).

Once you start doing that, you’ll notice that loading whole libraries on
startup each time is *slow*. The good news is you can get around this by
[pre-compiling the xtlang standard
library](2013-12-16-building-the-extempore-standard-library.org). You
don’t have to use the standard library, but it will save you a lot of
time on startup, and you don’t lose any flexibility (the xtlang
functions can all still be re-defined on the fly) so it’s probably not a
bad idea to use the library unless you have a reason not to.

Enjoy, and remember that if you have any problems you can hit us up on
the [mailing list](mailto:extemporelang@googlegroups.com). The standard
library is both a binary file (`libs/xtm.{dll,so,dylib}` depending on
your platform) and a `libs/xtm.xtm` file which is the ‘header’ for the
xtlang code in this library—it tells Extempore about what closures and
other data are present in the library and how to call them.

[^1]: There are lots of [other](../2012-08-09-xtlang-type-reference.org)
    [posts](../2012-08-17-memory-management-in-extempore.org) describing
    xtlang in more detail. In this post, I’ll just refer to the code
    generally, only clarifying whether its Scheme or xtlang when there’s
    a possibility for confusion.

[^2]: Currently Extempore doesn’t support encrypted connections for this
    purpose, and will blindly accept any connection which makes the
    right handshake. This is obviously a security risk, which will be
    addressed in a future release. For the moment, either block the
    default ports (`7098` and `7099`) in your firewall so that only
    machines on the local network can connect to Extempore, or cross
    your fingers and rely on security through obscurity.

[^3]: This is a good thing: the audio clock will usually be more stable
    and accurate than your computer’s default system clock, especially
    if you’re using a dedicated external audio interface.

[^4]: Extempore’s processes are kindof like POSIX threads.

[^5]: Interpreted Scheme code, on the other hand, won’t cause the
    `extempore` process to print anything to the log.
